# VCAIMAGES

Categories: INCAR tag, Advanced molecular-dynamics sampling

VCAIMAGES = [real]  
 Default: **VCAIMAGES** = -1

Description: The tag VCAIMAGES allows to perform thermodynamic coupling constant integrations. To achieve this, two molecular dynamics simulations are performed with e.g. different POTCAR or KPOINTS files or different exchange-correlation functionals, and force averaging between the two calculations is done.

---

The tag VCAIMAGES internally splits the available nodes into two groups, and each group
then performs an independent VASP calculation (this implies VCAIMAGES only works in the MPI version).
This behavior is implemented in the same way as
the nudged elastic band method described under the tag IMAGES. As opposed to the nudged
elastic band method, VASP creates always two images by setting the tag IMAGES=2 internally.
The two calculations are performed in subdirectories 01 and 02 (as opposed to the nudged elastic
band method, subdirectories 00 and 03 are not required). A precise description of the file
reading and writing is given below.

The two VASP calculations are essentially performed independently in subdirectories 01 and 02.
The forces, energies and the stress tensor of the two calculations are averaged according to the tag VCAIMAGES.
Specifically, the value supplied in the tag VCAIMAGES determines the weight of the calculations
performed in subdirectory 01. The weight of the second image is 1-VCAIMAGES. The averaging
is performed after self-consistency has been reached and affects the final total energy as well as
the forces. Since the energies and forces are averaged, the trajectories generated by the two simulations
will be exactly identical. Make sure though, that the initial POSCAR files in the two subdirectories
are exactly identical. The averaged energies can be found in the OUTCAR file after the lines
"ENERGY OF THE ELECTRON-ION-THERMOSTAT SYSTEM (eV)", as well as in the file OSZICAR
(in the lines writing the free energy "F="). This makes scanning the OSZICAR file for the
required energies of the individual calculations somewhat awkward.

Special handling: In some cases it might be desirable to use a different number of cores for
the first image and the second image. For instance, this might be expedient for calculations
where thermodynamic integration is performed from a coarse to a dense k-point grid, or from a cheap
to an expensive exchange-correlation functional.
To set the number of cores in the first image the tag NCORE\_IN\_IMAGE1 has to be set. The second image then
contains the remaining cores.

The usage of this tag is also explained in the supplementary information of reference .

## Related tags and articles

NCORE\_IN\_IMAGE1, SCALEE, IMAGES

## References

---
